
    1. Project description — Redefining the visual critical period: natural behavior and neural dynamics
        1.1  General Scientific Challenge and Project Overview
At the heart of brain development lies a phenomenon that is both foundational and transformative: the critical period. Critical periods are temporal windows characterized by sensitivity in the nervous system to changes, be it chemical, electrical, or environmental1,2. During embryonic development, these windows describe periods during which genetic programming guides the initial anatomical connectivity and intrinsic neuronal activity primes circuits and synaptic connections for the arrival of sensory information after birth3. However, the environment and physical properties of an individual, into which the brain is born, cannot be genetically encoded2. Thus, the arrival of sensory input marks the beginning of a unique critical period, wherein neural circuit maturation is highly malleable and depends strongly on an individual’s experience. Deviation or disruption in a normal sensory experience during this time can pose serious consequences, such as, imprecise anatomical connectivity, aberrant wiring of brain circuits, or long-lasting neurodevelopmental disorders4. Despite the importance of experience-dependent processes during critical periods, our understanding of this process is severely limited.
According to the classical model, the postnatal critical period of neural development is a feed-forward process: experience shapes neural activity, thereby influencing the structure, gene expression, and function of brain circuits5 (Fig. 1, classic model). Missing from this model is the role of a dynamic, evolving experience. Animals are not a passive sponge during the critical period, but rather, engage with the world through dynamically changing experiences as their natural behaviors emerge. Sensory experience and perception are shaped by active behaviors, which are constrained by peripheral sampling and the computational capacity of neural circuits to process and propagate information. We propose that the postnatal experience-dependent critical period is a bidirectional or recurrent process, involving feed-forward and feed-back processes (Fig. 1, proposed model). Sensory experience and behavior drive patterns of neuronal activity, which shape neuron
structure and functional properties, which in turn reshape sensitivity to sensory inputs and inform behavioral experience
and performance6. To study the implications of this new conceptual model, we plan to construct a novel experimental platform in a highly evolved mammalian species to study the development of natural behaviors and neural network organization and functional activity, utilizing modern technological methods and computational tools.
Current understanding of the critical period derives primarily from decades of studying the visual system. In essence, there are two milestones used to describe this window. First, there is eye opening, a fundamental binary state transition initiating the refinement and maturation of structural (e.g. dendritic morphology and synaptic connections) and functional (e.g. spatial receptive field) properties in visual neurons. Second, there is the window of ocular dominance (OD) plasticity, first discovered by Hubel and Wiesel7 in carnivores and primates and measured by artificial sensory deprivation. Even today, OD plasticity via sensory deprivation still serves as the primary method for defining and studying the visual critical period, even though deprivation produces an abnormal experience and underlies amblyopia. Critically missing from this picture are the natural milestones of visual development following eye opening and visually-guided behaviors that concurrently emerge with maturing visual circuits. To address this challenge, we propose a first-principles approach using the ferret visual system to rigorously characterize the developmental trajectory of natural visually-guided behaviors and map that trajectory to concurrent maturation of synapses and cells in the primary visual cortex (V1).
The proposed studies will characterize development of visually-guided, ethologically-relevant behaviors in the ferret (Fig. 2). Ferrets are the ideal model system to address this challenge. Not only are they born immature8,9, allowing for experimental investigation weeks before eye opening, but possess advantages over both rodents and primates. Unlike rodents, their visual system has a columnar organization and is far more similar to primates10,11. Unlike primates, ferrets can be used in a high-throughput manner and are amenable to the application of state-of-the-art neurotechnology12.
In the first phase (Project 1), we will harness modern technological methods and computational tools to track the natural development of visually-guided behaviors, kinematics, and eye-movements in ferrets. Upon
this foundation, we will perform manipulation experiments to test how visually-guided behaviors during the critical period depend on experience and properties of the visual system. In the second phase (Project 2), we will incorporate in vivo two-photon (2P) microscopy to map the structural and functional dynamics of neural networks at synaptic and cellular scale. Initially, we will follow established methods, but through a collaborative effort we will employ novel head-mounted miniature 2P microscopes to visualize neural circuits simultaneously with the tracking of behavior and eye-movements throughout development. This proposal will produce a novel platform for studying the intersection between dynamic experience, circuit maturation, and the development of natural ethologically-relevant behaviors.



        1.2  Public Health Relevance
Figure 2: Overview of proposed projects.
Visual experience during postnatal development is critical for perceptual, cognitive, and social development. Developmental disorders, such as strabismus amblyopia (affecting 2-5% of the human population13), remain a significant health problem and few therapeutic interventions have successfully translated from rodent research to clinical promise14. Other developmental disorders presenting visual deficits, such as autism spectrum disorder and schizophrenia, occur from an otherwise normal environment, however circuit disruption during experience-dependent plasticity may be an underlying cause25. Understanding the normal neurodevelopmental processes during the critical period can aid in the identification of potential targets for therapeutic intervention. By understanding the bidirectional nature of behavioral experience and neural dynamics during development, we can explore potential therapies in a novel framework and identify when they are most impactful. In addition, the ferret model system may offer greater insights to human visual development as compared to rodents; ferrets have forward-facing eyes and possess an early visual system architecture like primates. A deeper understanding of the visual critical period may also open new avenues to adult plasticity, inspiring new strategies for therapy and lifelong learning.
        1.3  Project Objective
The goal of this proposal is to redefine the critical period of visual development by the temporal emergence of natural behaviors in ferrets and map concurrent neural dynamics at synaptic and cellular scale. The proposed experiments will shed light on the bidirectional nature of experience-dependent development. We will answer the following major questions:
            ▪ How do visually-guided behaviors evolve after eye opening?
            ▪ How does the emergence and execution of visually-guided behaviors depend on experience and concomitant changes in visual circuits?
            ▪ Do synapse populations and cellular circuits mature in lockstep with behaviors, or do they precede or follow behavioral changes?
            ▪ How do visually-guided behaviors and visual experience directly drive neural dynamics?
        1.4  Approach
As per the Funding Opportunity Announcement (RFA-RM-23-005), a detailed experimental plan and extensive preliminary data are not provided. This section describes our general experimental approaches and some preliminary, unpublished data on which these projects are based.
1.4a Project 1: Characterize natural behavioral experience during development
Scientific challenge and opportunity: The textbook definition of the critical period of visual development is based on the time of eye opening and window of OD plasticity. Neither of these milestones considers the animal’s ethological behaviors or natural sensory experience. In addition, neither of these milestones takes into account the recurrent process of development whereby a changing, dynamic sensory experience instructs neural network dynamics, which in turn, constrain perceptual experience and behavior. To address this challenge, we will harness modern techniques and computational tools to track the natural development of visually-guided behaviors, kinematics, and eye-movements in ferrets. This project, already beginning, will serve as a foundation for understanding how the perception of the world changes over time, as well as emergence of ethologically-relevant visual behaviors (e.g. navigation, head/eye orienting, and tracking simulated prey). We will then engage in manipulation experiments to test how the visually-guided behaviors during the critical period depend on experience and specific properties of neural circuits. These manipulations will help redefine the critical period window based on behavioral readouts.
Project 1 details: To describe how visually-guided behaviors evolve after eye opening in the ferret, we will return to a first-principles approach. We will construct an arena (~3x3 m), and provide a number of objects (e.g. balls and toys) for ferrets to interact with. High-resolution cameras to track behavior will be fitted with lenses (Nikon) to optimize pixel resolution over the arena area. This includes a depth camera (Basler Blaze) to capture behaviors in 3D. The walls of the arena will be transparent and computer monitors will be attached to the outside in order to display a range of stimuli (e.g. natural images, gratings, filtered noise)15. We will engage the visual system using a toy mouse with programmatically controlled movements and speed.
Ferrets are raised in our animal facility. Ferret kits are born and can be acclimated in the behavioral arena multiple days before the eyes open. Kits undergo survival surgery for implantation of headposts and/or recording chambers prior to eye opening (see below and Project 2). After acclimation, starting day 1 of eye opening, kits will be placed in the behavioral arena for 10-20 min. We will record their kinematics (i.e. body, head, tail movements) as they explore and navigate around objects placed in the arena. We will also test their ability to visually-track a toy mouse, varying the spatial position, trajectory, and speed. Ferret kits will be recorded in the behavioral arena daily or on alternating days for up to 4 weeks after eye opening, during the classic critical period window defined by ocular dominance plasticity.
DeepLabCut16 will be used to track the position of different components of each animal (i.e. body, head, tail), training models for each animal and the simulated mouse. Models will be trained across randomly sampled movie frames (total ~1000 per model) to generalize over different behaviors (i.e. volitional exploration vs. directed tracking). Models will be trained on multiple batches of data and several validation steps will be used to quantify model fits. Pilot data from our lab of DeepLabCut- based tracking over development is shown in Figure 3. Animal trajectories will be processed and analyzed (Python/Matlab). Simple computational analyses include measuring changes in an animal’s speed, acceleration, motor coordination across the head/ body, and ability of an animal to track visual objects. In addition, we will deploy novel ethologically inspired unbiased strategies to identify behavioral motifs over development. Such strategies include Time-REsolved BehavioraL Embedding (TREBLE)17 and Motion Sequencing (Moseq)18, which will uncover continuous behavioral dynamics, variation across individuals, and reveal structure in pose estimation data.
Critical to characterizing visual experience is measuring conjunctive eye-movements. To accompany behavioral recordings, we will mount eye/head tracking hardware to capture, eye-movements, the world view of the animal, and the inertial forces of the animal’s head (Rosco Tech) (Fig. 2). We will build a custom design for this device following published methods15,19,20 and guidance from our collaborator, Dr. Philip Parker (Rutgers). This device will be attached to the animal’s head via an implanted titanium D-post and the device’s hardware (cameras, IMU sensor) will be attached to a 3D printed holder that slots onto the D-post. Connected wires will be tethered above the arena and through a motorized commutator (AlphaOmega) so the animal can more freely. Eye-movement data will be processed and gaze-corrected using the world view camera. Processing and analysis of eye- and head movements will be conducted with guidance from Drs. Jacob Yates (Berkely) and Philip Parker15,21.
After establishing how visually-guided behaviors and eye-movements develop post eye opening, we will conduct manipulation experiments. These experiments will involve chronic and acute manipulations. Chronic manipulations will test how developmental trajectories depend on visual experience. Acute manipulations will


Figure 3: Visually-guided behaviors develop quickly after eye opening. Shown are tracked points on an individual ferret recorded in a behavioral arena for ~2 weeks after EO. Each plot shows movement in time over 7 seconds. In each epoch, a toy mouse is presented and moved for tracking. Immediately after EO, animals do not appear to move or follow visual cues. Two weeks later, animals demonstrate accurate visually-guided tracking and chasing.
allow us to identify which specific components of the visual system are being used during behaviors (i.e. cone- vs. rod-based)22. Chronic manipulations will be conducted by rearing animals in artificial environments. Chronic manipulations may also be initiated at difference timepoints before eye opening and during the classically- defined window of OD plasticity. Acute manipulations will be conducted by changing the illumination and visual statistics of the arena. Table 1 shows proposed manipulations, duration, and specific outcomes expected.

TABLE 1
Manipulation	Duration	Expected Outcome
Dark rearing	Chronic	Visually-guided behavioral trajectory strongly delayed until vision onset Precocious eye opening	Chronic	Behavioral maturation begins earlier
Monocular deprivation	Chronic	Complex behavioral repertoires require proper binocular vision
Spatial acuity:	Acute	High spatial acuity-based behaviors develop at slower rate than low spatial acuity low (M-pathway)	 Chronic	 Natural spatial frequencies (1/f) are required for emergence of natural behaviors vs. high (P-pathway)
Luminance levels:	 Acute	Rod-photoreceptor based behaviors develop at slower rate than cone based scotopic (M-pathway)	Chronic	Eye-movement statistics and behavior emergence depend on visual pathway driven vs. photopic (P-pathway)
Color wavelength	Acute		L-cone (558nm), S-cone (430nm), and rod (505nm) based behaviors develop at different rates Reverse motion training. Chronic	Signals from locomotion-driven optic flow shape emergence of visually-guided behaviors

Project 1 expected results: Pilot data collected in our lab shows innate and directed behaviors are quickly emerge in ferrets after eye opening (Figs. 3 & 4). Around 4 days post eye opening, animal locomotion speed and acceleration are increase. Surprisingly, animals reach adult-levels after ~2 weeks of vision. As expected, we observed coordination in motor movements: the angles of head and body velocity vectors became more similar as animal’s make coordinated head-body movements. We observed enhanced
visual tracking of the simulated prey mouse (Fig. 3), evident by animals beginning to track and chase the toy after ~1 week and increased complexity in trajectories. Quantitative analysis (Fig. 4, bottom right) demonstrated animals progressively getting better at tracking. Overall, we expect (and observed) motor and visual behaviors to emerge progressively. While we have not recorded eye-movements, we expect eye-movement statistics and head movements to progressively change after eye opening as brain circuits mature (like humans and primates)6. Specifically, we hypothesize that saccade amplitude will increase, saccade frequency will increase as acuity is enhanced, saccade latency will decrease, any head-eye fixation will become more stabilized, and the oculomotor system will be refined. As we propose to conduct many manipulations, the type and expected outcome are outline in Table 1. We expect each of these to produce exciting and novel behavioral readouts. For example, monocular deprivation has never been studied dynamically or behaviorally, but is expected to produce profound hinderances in complex visual behaviors.
Project 1 limitations and alternative approaches: High-risk, explorative experiments accompany a number of unforeseen variables. (1) We cannot


Figure 4: Ferret locomotion, motor coordination, and visually- guided behaviors mature quickly after eye opening.
predict the temporal resolution (hourly, daily, weekly) required to capture the emergence of visually-guided behaviors. We may need to collect data for several weeks after eye opening or make multiple measurements daily around particularly sensitive period. (2) It is not clear how much developmental variation there will be between animals, but will be able to use computational tools17,18 to quantify this variation, novel and interesting in itself. (3) Eye-movement statistics may be difficult to measure and the exact designs described previously15,19 may not work for ferrets. Thus, we plan to construct several different designs and create a ‘dummy’ apparatus to acclimate animals to the device. Notably, as ferret kits are 10x larger than a mouse (~200-400g) and have particularly strong neck muscles, we believe there will be greater flexibility in design choice. (4) Simulated prey (i.e. toy mouse) shows promise but may not drive sufficient naturalistic behaviors or be able to be moved in a reliable, naturalistic manner. If this is the case, we can use a
real prey (i.e. crickets)23 and look for inspiration from wild ferret species. (5) A redefinition of the visual critical period in terms of behaviorally-driven experience may not be a straightforward endeavor. Likely, this is a complicated process involving multiple developmental windows and recurrent interactions. While this poses a gap between our proposed conceptual framework and project, we hope these initial experiments will provide a foundation and can bring collaborators to help apply effective computational analysis to unravel the dynamics. (6) Another conceptual limitation is a lack of consideration of underlying molecular changes which are proposed to gate OD plasticity in rodents24,25. It is possible that visually-guided behaviors mature following the release of ‘molecular breaks’ or inhibitory interneuron maturation. While some proposed manipulation experiments may test this possibility (Table 1), more direct tests will require optogenetic or chemogenetic manipulation experiments.
Project 1 future directions: After completing initial experiments, there are many directions we are considering to enhance behavioral readouts and manipulation of visual experience. We plan to incorporate time-of-flight cameras to capture behaviors in 3D (Basler Blaze; Fig. 5) and bolster data for extracting motifs. We would like to incorporate an overhead projector illumination system to create visual stimuli or illusory
objects/prey in real-time. Once we collect robust visual-tracking data, we plan to extract quantitative temporal, behavior kernels as used for human psychophysics26. Finally, as
Figure 5: Ferret movements in 3D
mentioned above, there are several possible manipulations to conduct. We would like to test the role of ON/ OFF pathways with APB retinal injections to suppress the ON pathway, the functional role of the lateral geniculate nucleus and primary visual cortex with acute optogenetic or chemogenetic inactivation, and eventually incorporate the ability to disrupt the expression of signaling molecules or postsynaptic receptors important for neural plasticity (e.g. CaMKII and NMDA receptors).

1.5  Rigor and Reproducibility
Our lab maintains high scientific rigor, includes male and female subjects in all experiments, blinds experimenters for analyses when necessary, and uses appropriate, robust statistical analyses. A key tenet of the lab is reproducibility: we strive for reproducibility in experiments or data analyses both within the lab and with collaborating labs. Power analyses will be used to determine sample sizes for each experiment, but we expect effect sizes to differ across experiments. We will continue to record from both males and females, testing for any potential sex differences in behavioral development. Rigorous controls for all experiments will be performed as previously described12,15,21,29,32. Statistical analyses will be performed in Matlab and Python using available packages and custom code. The type of statistical analyses chosen will depend on properties of the data (e.g. normally distributed, circular variables) and based on the specific hypothesis being tested (i.e. linear regression vs. principal components analysis). Typically, data we collect requires nonparametric analyses. To ensure proper statistical analyses we will consult with our expert collaborators (Drs. Jacob Yates and Philip Parker) and members of the Computational Neuroscience Initiative at University of Pennsylvania.
    2. Innovations
    • Innovation 1 (conceptual): We will redefine the critical period of visual development as a recurrent process. Venturing into new territory, we will consider how the visual experience changes after eye opening and describe the critical period in terms of naturally emerging behaviors. This fresh perspective can lead to the identification of novel developmental milestones for linking to synaptic and cellular plasticity.
    • Innovation 2 (experimental): Project 1 proposed experiments are unique and will produce first-of-a-kind datasets on the developing behaviors and visual experience (i.e. ferret head and eye-movements). These data will be invaluable for the field of neuroscience. Moreover, these datasets will not only contain observations, but also perturbation experiments manipulating sensory experience and the early visual system. This will provide novel behavioral readouts of sensory and circuit manipulations.
    • Innovation 3 (analytical): We will apply state-of-the art computational methods (i.e. DeepLabCut, TREBLE, MoSeq) to analyze behavioral data from individual developing ferrets. Not only will this be the first time these methods are applied to a mammalian developmental model, but they will reveal rich behavioral repertoires.
      
