RESEARCH STRATEGY

Project areas: 7 NS, 6 MCB

1. Project description — Redefining the visual critical period: natural behavior and neural dynamics
1.1 General Scientific Challenge and Project Overview
At the heart of brain development lies a phenomenon that is both foundational and transformative: the
critical period. Critical periods are temporal windows characterized by sensitivity in the nervous system to
changes, be it chemical, electrical, or environmental1,2. During embryonic development, these windows
describe periods during which genetic programming guides the initial anatomical connectivity and intrinsic
neuronal activity primes circuits and synaptic connections for the arrival of sensory information after birth3.
However, the environment and physical properties of an individual, into which the brain is born, cannot be
genetically encoded2. Thus, the arrival of sensory input marks the beginning of a unique critical period, wherein
neural circuit maturation is highly malleable and depends strongly on an individual’s experience. Deviation or
disruption in a normal sensory experience during this time can pose serious consequences, such as, imprecise
anatomical connectivity, aberrant wiring of brain circuits, or long-lasting neurodevelopmental disorders4.
Despite the importance of experience-dependent processes during critical periods, our understanding of this
process is severely limited.
According to the classical model, the postnatal critical
period of neural development is a feed-forward process:
experience shapes neural activity, thereby influencing the
structure, gene expression, and function of brain circuits5 (Fig. 1,
classic model). Missing from this model is the role of a dynamic,
evolving experience. Animals are not a passive sponge during
the critical period, but rather, engage with the world through
dynamically changing experiences as their natural behaviors
emerge. Sensory experience and perception are shaped by
active behaviors, which are constrained by peripheral sampling
and the computational capacity of neural circuits to process and
propagate information. We propose that the postnatal
experience-dependent critical period is a bidirectional or
recurrent process, involving feed-forward and feed-back
processes (Fig. 1, proposed model). Sensory experience and
behavior drive patterns of neuronal activity, which shape neuron
structure and functional properties, which in turn reshape
Figure 1: Schematic of conceptual framework
sensitivity to sensory inputs and inform behavioral experience
and performance6. To study the implications of this new conceptual model, we plan to construct a novel
experimental platform in a highly evolved mammalian species to study the development of natural behaviors
and neural network organization and functional activity, utilizing modern technological methods and
computational tools.
Current understanding of the critical period derives primarily from decades of studying the visual
system. In essence, there are two milestones used to describe this window. First, there is eye opening, a
fundamental binary state transition initiating the refinement and maturation of structural (e.g. dendritic
morphology and synaptic connections) and functional (e.g. spatial receptive field) properties in visual neurons.
Second, there is the window of ocular dominance (OD) plasticity, first discovered by Hubel and Wiesel7 in
carnivores and primates and measured by artificial sensory deprivation. Even today, OD plasticity via sensory
deprivation still serves as the primary method for defining and studying the visual critical period, even though
deprivation produces an abnormal experience and underlies amblyopia. Critically missing from this picture are
the natural milestones of visual development following eye opening and visually-guided behaviors that
concurrently emerge with maturing visual circuits. To address this challenge, we propose a first-principles
approach using the ferret visual system to rigorously characterize the developmental trajectory of natural
visually-guided behaviors and map that trajectory to concurrent maturation of synapses and cells in the primary
visual cortex (V1).
The proposed studies will characterize development of visually-guided, ethologically-relevant behaviors
in the ferret (Fig. 2). Ferrets are the ideal model system to address this challenge. Not only are they born
immature8,9, allowing for experimental investigation weeks before eye opening, but possess advantages over
both rodents and primates. Unlike rodents, their visual system has a columnar organization and is far more
similar to primates10,11. Unlike primates, ferrets can be used in a high-throughput manner and are amenable to
the application of state-of-the-art neurotechnology12.
In the first phase (Project 1), we will harness modern technological methods and computational tools to
track the natural development of visually-guided behaviors, kinematics, and eye-movements in ferrets. Upon

this foundation, we will perform manipulation experiments to test how visually-guided behaviors during the
critical period depend on experience and properties of the visual system. In the second phase (Project 2), we
will incorporate in vivo two-photon (2P) microscopy to map the structural and functional dynamics of neural
networks at synaptic and cellular scale. Initially, we will follow established methods, but through a collaborative
effort we will employ novel head-mounted miniature 2P microscopes to visualize neural circuits simultaneously
with the tracking of behavior and eye-movements throughout development. This proposal will produce a novel
platform for studying the intersection between dynamic experience, circuit maturation, and the development of
natural ethologically-relevant behaviors.

Figure 2: Overview of proposed projects.

1.2 Public Health Relevance
Visual experience during postnatal development is critical for perceptual, cognitive, and social
development. Developmental disorders, such as strabismus amblyopia (affecting 2-5% of the human
population13), remain a significant health problem and few therapeutic interventions have successfully
translated from rodent research to clinical promise14. Other developmental disorders presenting visual deficits,
such as autism spectrum disorder and schizophrenia, occur from an otherwise normal environment, however
circuit disruption during experience-dependent plasticity may be an underlying cause25. Understanding the
normal neurodevelopmental processes during the critical period can aid in the identification of potential targets
for therapeutic intervention. By understanding the bidirectional nature of behavioral experience and neural
dynamics during development, we can explore potential therapies in a novel framework and identify when they
are most impactful. In addition, the ferret model system may offer greater insights to human visual
development as compared to rodents; ferrets have forward-facing eyes and possess an early visual system
architecture like primates. A deeper understanding of the visual critical period may also open new avenues to
adult plasticity, inspiring new strategies for therapy and lifelong learning.
1.3 Project Objective
The goal of this proposal is to redefine the critical period of visual development by the temporal
emergence of natural behaviors in ferrets and map concurrent neural dynamics at synaptic and cellular scale.
The proposed experiments will shed light on the bidirectional nature of experience-dependent development.
We will answer the following major questions:
● How do visually-guided behaviors evolve after eye opening?
● How does the emergence and execution of visually-guided behaviors depend on experience and
concomitant changes in visual circuits?
● Do synapse populations and cellular circuits mature in lockstep with behaviors, or do they precede or
follow behavioral changes?
● How do visually-guided behaviors and visual experience directly drive neural dynamics?

1.4 Approach
As per the Funding Opportunity Announcement (RFA-RM-23-005), a detailed experimental plan and extensive
preliminary data are not provided. This section describes our general experimental approaches and some
preliminary, unpublished data on which these projects are based.
1.4a Project 1: Characterize natural behavioral experience during development
Scientific challenge and opportunity: The textbook definition of the critical period of visual development is
based on the time of eye opening and window of OD plasticity. Neither of these milestones considers the
animal’s ethological behaviors or natural sensory experience. In addition, neither of these milestones takes into
account the recurrent process of development whereby a changing, dynamic sensory experience instructs
neural network dynamics, which in turn, constrain perceptual experience and behavior. To address this
challenge, we will harness modern techniques and computational tools to track the natural development of
visually-guided behaviors, kinematics, and eye-movements in ferrets. This project, already beginning, will
serve as a foundation for understanding how the perception of the world changes over time, as well as
emergence of ethologically-relevant visual behaviors (e.g. navigation, head/eye orienting, and tracking
simulated prey). We will then engage in manipulation experiments to test how the visually-guided behaviors
during the critical period depend on experience and specific properties of neural circuits. These manipulations
will help redefine the critical period window based on behavioral readouts.
Project 1 details: To describe how visually-guided behaviors evolve after eye opening in the ferret, we will
return to a first-principles approach. We will construct an arena (~3x3 m), and provide a number of objects (e.g.
balls and toys) for ferrets to interact with. High-resolution cameras to track behavior will be fitted with lenses
(Nikon) to optimize pixel resolution over the arena area. This includes a depth camera (Basler Blaze) to
capture behaviors in 3D. The walls of the arena will be transparent and computer monitors will be attached to
the outside in order to display a range of stimuli (e.g. natural images, gratings, filtered noise)15. We will engage
the visual system using a toy mouse with programmatically controlled movements and speed.
Ferrets are raised in our animal facility. Ferret kits are born and can be acclimated in the behavioral
arena multiple days before the eyes open. Kits undergo survival surgery for implantation of headposts and/or
recording chambers prior to eye opening (see below and Project 2). After acclimation, starting day 1 of eye
opening, kits will be placed in the behavioral arena for 10-20 min. We will record their kinematics (i.e. body,
head, tail movements) as they explore and navigate around objects placed in the arena. We will also test their
ability to visually-track a toy mouse, varying the spatial position, trajectory, and speed. Ferret kits will be
recorded in the behavioral arena daily or on alternating days for up to 4 weeks after eye opening, during the
classic critical period window defined by ocular dominance plasticity.
DeepLabCut16 will be used to track the position of different components of each animal (i.e. body, head,
tail), training models for each animal and the simulated mouse. Models will be trained across randomly
sampled movie frames (total ~1000 per model) to generalize over different behaviors (i.e. volitional exploration
vs. directed tracking). Models will be trained on multiple batches of data and several validation steps will be
used to quantify model fits. Pilot data from our lab of DeepLabCut- based tracking over development is
shown in Figure 3. Animal trajectories will be processed and analyzed (Python/Matlab). Simple computational
analyses include measuring changes in an animal’s speed, acceleration, motor coordination across the head/
body, and ability of an animal to track visual objects. In addition, we will deploy novel ethologically inspired
unbiased strategies to identify behavioral motifs over development. Such strategies include Time-REsolved
BehavioraL Embedding (TREBLE)17 and Motion Sequencing (Moseq)18, which will uncover continuous
behavioral dynamics, variation across individuals, and reveal structure in pose estimation data.
Critical to characterizing visual experience is measuring conjunctive eye-movements. To accompany
behavioral recordings, we will mount eye/head tracking hardware to capture, eye-movements, the world view
of the animal, and the inertial forces of the animal’s head (Rosco Tech) (Fig. 2). We will build a custom design
for this device following published methods15,19,20 and guidance from our collaborator, Dr. Philip Parker
(Rutgers). This device will be attached to the animal’s head via an implanted titanium D-post and the device’s
hardware (cameras, IMU sensor) will be attached to a 3D printed holder that slots onto the D-post. Connected
wires will be tethered above the arena and through a motorized commutator (AlphaOmega) so the animal can
more freely. Eye-movement data will be processed and gaze-corrected using the world view camera.
Processing and analysis of eye- and head movements will be conducted with guidance from Drs. Jacob Yates
(Berkely) and Philip Parker15,21.
After establishing how visually-guided behaviors and eye-movements develop post eye opening, we will
conduct manipulation experiments. These experiments will involve chronic and acute manipulations. Chronic
manipulations will test how developmental trajectories depend on visual experience. Acute manipulations will

Figure 3: Visually-guided behaviors develop quickly after eye opening. Shown are tracked points on an individual ferret recorded
in a behavioral arena for ~2 weeks after EO. Each plot shows movement in time over 7 seconds. In each epoch, a toy mouse is
presented and moved for tracking. Immediately after EO, animals do not appear to move or follow visual cues. Two weeks later,
animals demonstrate accurate visually-guided tracking and chasing.

allow us to identify which specific components of the visual system are being used during behaviors (i.e. conevs. rod-based)22. Chronic manipulations will be conducted by rearing animals in artificial environments. Chronic
manipulations may also be initiated at difference timepoints before eye opening and during the classicallydefined window of OD plasticity. Acute manipulations will be conducted by changing the illumination and visual
statistics of the arena. Table 1 shows proposed manipulations, duration, and specific outcomes expected.
TABLE 1
Manipulation

Duration

Expected Outcome

Dark rearing

Chronic

Visually-guided behavioral trajectory strongly delayed until vision onset

Precocious eye opening

Chronic

Behavioral maturation begins earlier

Monocular deprivation

Chronic

Complex behavioral repertoires require proper binocular vision

Spatial acuity:
low (M-pathway)
vs. high (P-pathway)

Acute
Chronic

High spatial acuity-based behaviors develop at slower rate than low spatial acuity
Natural spatial frequencies (1/f) are required for emergence of natural behaviors

Luminance levels:
Acute
scotopic (M-pathway) Chronic
vs. photopic (P-pathway)

Rod-photoreceptor based behaviors develop at slower rate than cone based
Eye-movement statistics and behavior emergence depend on visual pathway driven

Color wavelength

Acute

L-cone (558nm), S-cone (430nm), and rod (505nm) based behaviors develop at different rates

Reverse motion training.

Chronic

Signals from locomotion-driven optic flow shape emergence of visually-guided behaviors

Project 1 expected results: Pilot data collected in our lab shows innate and directed behaviors are
quickly emerge in ferrets after eye opening (Figs. 3 & 4). Around 4 days post eye opening, animal
locomotion speed and acceleration are increase. Surprisingly, animals reach adult-levels after ~2 weeks of
vision. As expected, we observed coordination in motor movements: the angles of head and body velocity
vectors became more similar as animal’s make coordinated head-body movements. We observed enhanced

visual tracking of the simulated prey mouse (Fig.
3), evident by animals beginning to track and
chase the toy after ~1 week and increased
complexity in trajectories. Quantitative analysis
(Fig. 4, bottom right) demonstrated animals
progressively getting better at tracking. Overall,
we expect (and observed) motor and visual
behaviors to emerge progressively. While we
have not recorded eye-movements, we expect
eye-movement statistics and head movements to
progressively change after eye opening as brain
circuits mature (like humans and primates)6.
Specifically, we hypothesize that saccade
amplitude will increase, saccade frequency will
increase as acuity is enhanced, saccade latency
will decrease, any head-eye fixation will become
more stabilized, and the oculomotor system will
be refined. As we propose to conduct many
manipulations, the type and expected outcome
are outline in Table 1. We expect each of these to
produce exciting and novel behavioral readouts.
For example, monocular deprivation has never
been studied dynamically or behaviorally, but is
expected to produce profound hinderances in
complex visual behaviors.
Project 1 limitations and alternative approaches: Figure 4: Ferret locomotion, motor coordination, and visuallyHigh-risk, explorative experiments accompany a guided behaviors mature quickly after eye opening.
number of unforeseen variables. (1) We cannot
predict the temporal resolution (hourly, daily, weekly) required to capture the emergence of visually-guided
behaviors. We may need to collect data for several weeks after eye opening or make multiple measurements
daily around particularly sensitive period. (2) It is not clear how much developmental variation there will be
between animals, but will be able to use computational tools17,18 to quantify this variation, novel and interesting
in itself. (3) Eye-movement statistics may be difficult to measure and the exact designs described
previously15,19 may not work for ferrets. Thus, we plan to construct several different designs and create a
‘dummy’ apparatus to acclimate animals to the device. Notably, as ferret kits are 10x larger than a mouse
(~200-400g) and have particularly strong neck muscles, we believe there will be greater flexibility in design
choice. (4) Simulated prey (i.e. toy mouse) shows promise but may not drive sufficient naturalistic behaviors or
be able to be moved in a reliable, naturalistic manner. If this is the case, we can use a
real prey (i.e. crickets)23 and look for inspiration from wild ferret species. (5) A
redefinition of the visual critical period in terms of behaviorally-driven experience may
not be a straightforward endeavor. Likely, this is a complicated process involving
multiple developmental windows and recurrent interactions. While this poses a gap
between our proposed conceptual framework and project, we hope these initial
experiments will provide a foundation and can bring collaborators to help apply
effective computational analysis to unravel the dynamics. (6) Another conceptual
limitation is a lack of consideration of underlying molecular changes which are
proposed to gate OD plasticity in rodents24,25. It is possible that visually-guided
behaviors mature following the release of ‘molecular breaks’ or inhibitory interneuron
maturation. While some proposed manipulation experiments may test this possibility
(Table 1), more direct tests will require optogenetic or chemogenetic manipulation
experiments.
Project 1 future directions: After completing initial experiments, there are many
directions we are considering to enhance behavioral readouts and manipulation of
visual experience. We plan to incorporate time-of-flight cameras to capture behaviors
in 3D (Basler Blaze; Fig. 5) and bolster data for extracting motifs. We would like to
incorporate an overhead projector illumination system to create visual stimuli or illusory
objects/prey in real-time. Once we collect robust visual-tracking data, we plan to extract
quantitative temporal, behavior kernels as used for human psychophysics26. Finally, as

Figure 5: Ferret
movements in 3D

mentioned above, there are several possible manipulations to conduct. We would like to test the role of ON/
OFF pathways with APB retinal injections to suppress the ON pathway, the functional role of the lateral
geniculate nucleus and primary visual cortex with acute optogenetic or chemogenetic inactivation, and
eventually incorporate the ability to disrupt the expression of signaling molecules or postsynaptic receptors
important for neural plasticity (e.g. CaMKII and NMDA receptors).
1.4b Project 2: Map concurrent maturation of synaptic and cellular networks
Scientific challenge and opportunity: To understand the bidirectional, recurrent process during the critical
period of development it is important to assess the dynamic visual experience and underlying maturing neural
circuits. While decades of research have characterized how visual cortical circuits mature after eye opening27,
few have related those circuits to natural visual experience15,21 or have attempted to characterize how each
develops concurrently28. Thus, in this second phase, we will incorporate in vivo two-photon (2P) microscopy to
map the structural and functional dynamics of neural networks at synaptic and cellular scale. Geneticallyencoded activity-indicators will be imaged through a chronically-implanted window in the same animals
undergoing longitudinal tracking of visual behavior development (building on Project 1). Initially, this project will
rely on established methods for imaging (i.e. head-fixed), but through a collaborative effort, we plan to employ
head-mounted miniature 2P microscopes for capturing neural circuit activity simultaneously during active visual
behaviors in developing animals.
Project 2 details: To record neural dynamics at synaptic and cellular scale we will used in vivo 2P imaging of
the newest GCaMP variants (8s & 8f)34 expressed with adeno-associated viruses (AAV1/2) in the primary
visual cortex—routine procedure in our lab. Ferrets born on site will be injected with AAVs around 2 weeks of
age in a sterile surgical suite. To record from synapses, we will sparsely express GCaMP8 in excitatory
neurons by injecting a diluted virus (1:50,000) expressing Cre recombinase under the hSyn promoter and
injecting a second, Cre-dependent virus expressing GCaMP8s under a CAG promoter10,29. In this way, we will
visualize calcium signals in dendritic spines10,29, the exclusive site of excitatory synaptic inputs on layer 2/3
pyramidal neurons in ferret visual cortex. To record from excitatory neuron populations, we will inject a single
virus to express hSyn-GCaMP8f. Following AAV injection and a few days before eye opening (Postnatal day
28-30), we will implant both a cranial window over the injection site and the mounting apparatus for recording
eye/head movements (Fig. 2). The window will be sealed and protected with a custom 3D printed protective
cap.
In the first phase of project 2 we aim to
characterize the maturation of (1) dendritic spine
structure and function29 and (2) the organization
and functional response properties of excitatory
neuron populations12. In this first phase we will
use head-fixed 2P imaging procedures, routine in
the lab. We propose to record behavior and neural
dynamics on alternating days during the critical
period from the same animal (Fig. 6). Behavioral
recordings will be conducted as optimized in
Project 1. For 2P imaging, we place the window
under a state-of-the-art 2P microscope (Bruker 2P
Plus, Coherent Ultra-2 laser). On imaging days,
we will identify suitable field of views for recording
and present a large battery of visual stimuli
(PsychoPy) with a high-resolution 120Hz monitor.
Visual stimuli will include drifting gratings (varying
in spatial frequency, temporal frequency, and Figure 6: Experimental paradigm for recording developing
direction of motion), noise stimuli (white noise and behaviors and neural dynamics.
wavelets) for mapping spatial receptive fields, and
natural movie sequences. For dendritic spine imaging, we will collect data in a 50x50 µm area (~0.1 µm/px) for
optimal synaptic resolution. For cellular imaging, we will collect across a 1x1 mm area (~0.5 µm/px). Data
collected will be stored on a 100TB server onsite and processed locally. Processing involves nonrigid
registration (NoRMCorre) and state-of-the-art denoising methods using deep neural network learning and
inference from the Allen Brain Institute. (DeepInterpolation)33. Subsequent analysis will be conducted using
custom software code (Python/Matlab). We will analyze the classic stimulus-dependent receptive field
properties (e.g. feature selectivity, spatial frequency sensitivity), activity correlations between neighboring and

correlation structure of cells/synapses, and apply
computational approaches to assess the fidelity of
stimulus representations. We will track the same
field of view over multiple imaging sessions to
assess changes in the properties of cells and
synapses. For cellular populations, we will
measure micro- (columnar) and macro- (map)
circuit organization of stimulus-driven activity. For
synaptic populations we will be able to measure
structural and functional dynamics, as shown for
the pilot data shown in Figure 7. Structural
dynamics include the maintenance (stabilization),
elimination, and growth of new dendritic spines.
This is important as the critical period of
development involves enormous increase of
synaptic density and concurrent pruning as circuit
Figure 7: Synaptic pruning and functional dynamics captured with
mature.
Alongside structural dynamics, we will
2P longitudinal imaging.
assess the functional properties of synapses
which include not visual tuning, but also other properties such as calcium event amplitude, reliability, and
capture the emergence of local dendritic organization (i.e. clustering, dendritic nonlinearities).
Phase 2 of this project presents a novel and exciting
direction for our lab: simultaneous 2P imaging in freely-moving,
behaving ferrets during development. In this phase, we will
implant a cranial window with a custom headplate to attach a
head-mounted miniature 2P microscope designed by Dr. Emily
Gibson (UC Denver), a major collaborator (Fig. 8). Instead of
imaging and recording behavior on alternate days, we will
image excitatory cellular circuits in the primary visual cortex
using the 2P miniscope while ferrets are exploring and
interacting with toy mouse in the arena. We will illuminate the
walls of the arena with visual stimuli (e.g. gratings, noise) to
drive visually-evoked activity. Coupled fibers for transmitting
excitation laser pulses and collecting emitted light will be
tethered above the arena. Data collected will be stored,
processed, and analyzed similar to head-fixed 2P imaging data.
It will be critical to gaze-correct the world view camera for
accurate estimates of visual stimuli driving neural activity,
assisted by Dr. Jacob Yates. With these data we will be able to Figure 8: Schematic of light path and head-mounted
analyze neural activity driven by optic-flow, saccadic eye- miniature 2P microscope design (provided by Dr.
Emily Gibson).
movements, pursuit during tracking, and locomotion.
Project 2 expected results: As previously reported, we expect a number of functional response properties to
change over development. Receptive fields will become smaller, coinciding with tuning to higher spatial
frequencies, and the selectivity to specific visual stimuli will become more pronounced. In addition, reliability in
responses will increase. With respect to behavior, we posed a simple but profound question: do changes in the
visual cortical neurons preceded, lag, or occur in lockstep with an animal’s behavioral development? We might
expect any outcome, but it is most likely that neural dynamics will occur in concert. For example, the spatial
acuity of an animal will depend on neural circuit processing of high spatial frequencies and inform the specific
eye-movements used to sample the world (i.e. larger saccades occur for animals with lower acuity). For this
reason, we propose the high-risk experiments of capturing the visual experience of the animal simultaneously
with neural activity, putting us in the best possible position to align trajectories of behavioral development with
neural circuit maturation.
Project 2 limitations and alternative approaches: Imaging GCaMP signals with 2P microscopy presents a
number of known limitations. Recording depth is limited to the superficial cortex in high-scattering tissue like
that of the ferret. Temporal resolution is limited (~30 Hz), mostly due to the decay constant of calcium signals
(~0.5-1 sec), and could cause difficulties in relating neural activity to dynamic behavior evolving over a few
seconds (Fig. 3). Signal-to-noise can be an issue for low expression or immune-responses due to AAVs or
surgical implantation, although this is somewhat abated by application of denoising procedures33. As an
alternative approach we will use implanted extracellular electrodes developed by our collaborator DR. Chong

Xie (Rice). Dr. Xie’s lab has created flexible silicon electrodes31 (NeuroThreads) that can be implanted early in
develop, integrate with the neural tissue, and move with the brain as it grows during development. Spiking
activity will provide much higher temporal resolution of neural activity and we will not be limited to superficial
cortical layers, however it will be more difficult to follow the same cells day-to-day. Separately, we may
encounter a conceptual limitation: developmental trajectories of visually-guided behaviors and dynamic vision
may be too complicated to directly relate to changes in the receptive field properties of cells and synapses in
primary visual cortex. While we may not be able to achieve our overarching goal, the experimental data
collected will still be great value to the neuroscience community. In this case, however, we will attempt to
design simple visually-guided behavioral tasks that could be more directly related to visual cortical processing
(e.g. processing of motion information). Relatedly, it is possible that plasticity in primary visual cortex poorly
reflects developing behaviors, as other brains (e.g. motor cortex, superior colliculus) may be more critically
involved. We hope to use the foundation developed in Project 1 to push forward towards future experiments
exploring neural dynamics of these other brain areas.
Project 2 future directions: We are particularly excited about two different directions these experimental
paradigms will allow us to explore. First, we will expand our investigation to inhibitory interneurons. Tools
expressing GCaMP in specific interneuron types in nonmurine species are rapidly advancing. This will provide
us the opportunity to examine inhibitory network maturation and visually-guided behaviors during critical period
plasticity. Second, we will expand our investigations beyond primary visual cortex, moving both closer to the
retinal projections that transmit information to the visual pathway, farther up the hierarchical to higher visual
areas, and into other sensory areas that are undoubtedly involved with shaping visual experience. Third, we
will engage in manipulation experiments (Table 1) using this platform providing both behavioral and neural
readouts.
1.5 Rigor and Reproducibility
Our lab maintains high scientific rigor, includes male and female subjects in all experiments, blinds
experimenters for analyses when necessary, and uses appropriate, robust statistical analyses. A key tenet of
the lab is reproducibility: we strive for reproducibility in experiments or data analyses both within the lab and
with collaborating labs. Power analyses will be used to determine sample sizes for each experiment, but we
expect effect sizes to differ across experiments. We will continue to record from both males and females,
testing for any potential sex differences in behavioral development. Rigorous controls for all experiments will
be performed as previously described12,15,21,29,32. Statistical analyses will be performed in Matlab and Python
using available packages and custom code. The type of statistical analyses chosen will depend on properties
of the data (e.g. normally distributed, circular variables) and based on the specific hypothesis being tested (i.e.
linear regression vs. principal components analysis). Typically, data we collect requires nonparametric
analyses. To ensure proper statistical analyses we will consult with our expert collaborators (Drs. Jacob Yates
and Philip Parker) and members of the Computational Neuroscience Initiative at University of Pennsylvania.
2. Innovations
• Innovation 1 (conceptual): We will redefine the critical period of visual development as a recurrent process.
Venturing into new territory, we will consider how the visual experience changes after eye opening and
describe the critical period in terms of naturally emerging behaviors. This fresh perspective can lead to the
identification of novel developmental milestones for linking to synaptic and cellular plasticity.
• Innovation 2 (experimental): Project 1 proposed experiments are unique and will produce first-of-a-kind
datasets on the developing behaviors and visual experience (i.e. ferret head and eye-movements). These
data will be invaluable for the field of neuroscience. Moreover, these datasets will not only contain
observations, but also perturbation experiments manipulating sensory experience and the early visual
system. This will provide novel behavioral readouts of sensory and circuit manipulations.
• Innovation 3 (analytical): We will apply state-of-the art computational methods (i.e. DeepLabCut, TREBLE,
MoSeq) to analyze behavioral data from individual developing ferrets. Not only will this be the first time these
methods are applied to a mammalian developmental model, but they will reveal rich behavioral repertoires.
• Innovation 4 (experimental): Project 2’s proposed experiments are unique and will produce first-of-a-kind
datasets of 2P recordings of synaptic populations or cellular circuits collected from individual developing
ferrets as visually-guided behaviors emerge. In addition, 2P data will be processed using state-of-the-art
methods for registration and processing (i.e. DeepInterpolation).
• Innovation 5 (experimental): Experiments in project 2 will lead to data collected from cortical circuits
simultaneously while capturing emerging visually-guided behaviors. This will be the first-time head-mounted
miniature 2P imaging will be used in ferrets or a developing mammalian species.

Although this combination of innovative experiments are high-risk, we will take great care to ensure that highquality data is collected from any or all experiments proposed, regardless of the results. To improve our
chances in achieving positive results, we have partnered with expert scientists familiar with the suggested
methods and analyses (Dr. Philip Parker, Dr. Jacob Yates, Dr. Emily Gibson, and Dr. Chong Xie). That said, our
work has the capacity to revolutionize how we study early visual development and models of plasticity which
inform therapeutic approaches to neurodevelopmental visual disorders.
3. Investigator qualifications
Since my time as an undergraduate at the University of Oregon, I have shown a sustained track record
of scientific creativity, perseverance, and a willingness to take on challenges in innovative ways. In total, my
current scientific contributions have led to 32 publications, including 21 first-author papers and 3
(recent) senior-author papers.
As a physics undergrad with Dr. Mike Wehr, I learned highly-technical in vivo electrophysiological
techniques (whole-cell patch-clamp), generating critical data for several projects and the publication of 3 firstauthor papers. As a doctoral student with Dr. Nicholas Priebe at UT Austin, I expanded my experimental
repertoire (in vivo microscopy) and became committed to the study of early vision processing and visual
development. Supported by an NIH/NEI Training Grant and the broad vision community at UT Austin, my work
with Nicholas resulted in 12 publications, including 10 first-author papers. During my postdoctoral work at the
Max Planck Florida Institute for Neuroscience with Dr. David Fitzpatrick. I expanded my expertise in vision and
experimental techniques, receiving training on state-of-the-art neuroscience techniques such dendritic spine
calcium and glutamate imaging (2P microscopy), manipulation of cell-type specific neural activity
(optogenetics), and volumetric reconstruction of ultrastructure (electron microscopy)– all applied to a
nonmurine model system (the ferret). As a postdoc at MPFI, I had the opportunity to pursue independent
projects that did not stem from an established research program and form the necessary collaborations to
facilitate those projects. These projects, largely spearheaded by my own ideas and hypotheses, led to 5 firstauthor papers in the journals Neuron and Nature and helped me obtain independent funding through a
NIH K99/R00 Pathway to Independence Award. These projects also modernized and advanced the ferret
model system, providing an example to the field of neuroscience how novel techniques could be applied, and
even developed for the first time, in a nonmurine mammal.
I started my lab at the University of Pennsylvania in the Department of Neuroscience in July 2021. My
research environment is perfectly suited for the completion of this project. I have close collaborations with
several visual neuroscientists at Penn (Drs. Diego Contreras, Johannes Burge, and Mike Acaro) and discuss
ongoing work regularly. I am a member of the Vision Resource Center, providing direct access to highprecision machining and electronics shops that will facilitate development of the tools proposed to be used. I
have maintained a consistent publication track-record, continuing to develop new ideas and projects,
which have already led to 3 senior-author papers. As an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellow and Brain
Research Foundation awardee, I am connecting with exceptional junior faculty colleagues that will become the
next generation of neuroscientists.
I have already assembled a diverse and competent research team comprising two technicians (Joe
Barreto and Greg Bond), a senior technician with 2 decades of research experience (Tammi Coleman), and an
undergraduate (Amelia Demopoulos), who I have already trained to perform some of the techniques and
approaches proposed here. We are expecting at least one postdoc to join the lab in 2024 after their informal
commitment. In fact, Barreto, Coleman, and Bond were instrumental in collecting and analyzing preliminary
data presented. I have already begun advancing the ferret model system, receiving an NIH/NEI grant to
establish CRISPR/Cas9 editing for molecular perturbations. In addition, critical collaborations have been
established with: 1) Dr. Philip Parker (Rutgers) who is an expert at head-mounted eye-tracking hardware and
software, 2) Dr. Jacob Yates (Berkeley) who is an expert visual neuroscience and developing data-driven
models incorporating eye-movements of the early visual system, 3) Dr. Emily Gibson (UC Denver) who is an
expert in head-mounted miniature 2P microscopy, and 4) Dr. Chong Xie (Rice) whose lab develops flexible
chronically-implantable electrodes. As I am not (yet) an expert in these technologies, their assistance and
advice is vital.
Overall, I have the scientific foundation, technical expertise, experimental creativity, scientific personnel,
and unique team of collaborators to successfully complete this work. As a young investigator embarking on my
independent research career, I am determined to carve my own research niche that uniquely leverages my
experience and environment. This high-risk, high-reward New Innovator Award would provide an
unprecedented opportunity to jumpstart my research program and grant me the intellectual freedom to develop
a novel conceptual and methodological framework for studying the critical period of visual development.

4. Suitability for the New Innovator Award program
Discoveries require risk. Compared to a typical R01 application, this award provides an opportunity to
studying early visual development with new approaches and a fresh perspective The NIH Director’s New
Innovator Award Program affords a unique opportunity to blend technological, experimental, and conceptual
risks to redefine the visual critical period of development in terms of natural behaviors and simultaneous
recordings of neural dynamics. My proposal is suitable for the following reasons:
(a) This interdisciplinary project allows me to venture into a new field. My previous training and current
research program have focused on synaptic and cellular mechanisms of visual processing in mature, visuallyexperienced animals. This project will allow me to take advantage of the ferret model system and study visual
development. In addition, my previous work has not involved natural behaviors. This project will provide an
entry point into studying vision in the behaving ferret. As mentioned, a traditional R01 mechanism would not
support this proposal given the lack of extensive experience and abundant preliminary data on these subjects.
(b) The proposed experiments are high-risk and innovative. This application does not directly follow any of
my previous publications. Instead, it leverages my technical expertise, creative thinking, collaborative
disposition, and broad scientific interests. The high-risk experiments serve multiple purposes: they have the
potential to be more impactful to the field than incremental follow-up projects and provide the opportunity to
test my innovative ideas as I carve a research niche as an independent investigator.
(c) Dependence of project 2 on project 1 will yield valuable insights and transformative data. While the
experiments proposed in each project could be conducted separately, the neural recordings proposed will be
most impactful if collected alongside or simultaneously with developing, active visual behaviors. In particular,
the ability to track an animal’s body and head movements, accurately capture eye-movements, and collect
high-quality neural data is a holy grail of modern neuroscience research. This interdependence among projects
is discouraged in R01 applications but will be highly effective if funded through this mechanism.
Statement of research effort commitment: If selected for this award, I will commit at least 25% of my
research effort to this project.
References
1. Greenhill, S. D. et al. Adult cortical plasticity depends on an early postnatal critical period. Science 349 (2015).
2. Hensch, T. K. Criticl period regulation. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 27 (2004).
3. Chevée, M., Brown, S. P. The development of local circuits in the neocortex: recent lessons from the mouse visual cortex. Curr. Opin. Neurobio. 53 (2018).
4. Kiorpes, L. The Puzzle of Visual Development: Behavior and Neural Limits. J. Neurosci. 36 (2016).
5. Purves, D. et al. Neuroscience. (Oxford University Press).
6. Luna, B., Velanova, K., Geier, C. F. Development of eye-movement control. Brain Cogn. 68 (2008).
7. Wiesel, T. N., Hubel, D. H. Single-cell responses in striate cortex of kittens deprived of vision in one eye. J. Neurophysiol. 26 (1963).
8. Jackson, C., Peduzzi, J., Hickey, T. Visual cortex development in the ferret. I. Genesis and migration of visual cortical neurons. J. Neurosci. 9 (1989).
9. Borrell, V. In vivo gene delivery to the postnatal ferret cerebral cortex by DNA electroporation. J. Neurosci. Methods 186 (2010).
10. Wilson, D.E., Whitney, D.E., Scholl, B., Fitzpatrick, D. Orientation selectivity and the functional clustering of synaptic inputs in primary visual cortex. Nat.
Neurosci. 19 (2016).
11. Weliky, M., Katz, L. Functional mapping of horizontal connections in developing ferret visual cortex: experiments and modeling. J. Neurosci. 14 (1994).
12. Wilson, D. E., Scholl, B., Fitzpatrick, D. Differential tuning of excitation and inhibition shapes direction selectivity in ferret visual cortex. Nature 560 (2018).
13. Chang, M. Y. et al. Quality of Life in Adults With Strabismus. A. J. Ophthalmology 159 (2015).
14. Fong, M., Duffy, K. R., Leet, M. P., Candler, C. T., Bear, M. F. Correction of amblyopia in cats and mice after the critical period. eLife 10 (2021).
15. Parker, P. R. L., Abe, E. T. T., Leonard, E. S. P., Martins, D. M., Niell, C. M. Joint coding of visual input and eye/head position in V1 of freely moving mice.
Neuron 110 (2022).
16. Mathis, A. et al. DeepLabCut: markerless pose estimation of user-defined body parts with deep learning. Nat. Neurosci. 21 (2018).
17. York, R. A., Carreira-Rosario, A., Giocomo, L. M., Clandinin, T. R. Flexible analysis of animal behavior via time-resolved manifold embedding. bioRxiv, https://
doi.org/10.1101/2020.09.30.321406 (2021).
18. Wiltschko, A. B. et al. Revealing the structure of pharmacobehavioral space through motion sequencing. Nat. Neurosci. 23 (2020).
19. Meyer, A. F., Poort, J., O’Keefe, J., Sahani, M., Linden, J. F. A Head-Mounted Camera System Integrates Detailed Behavioral Monitoring with Multichannel
Electrophysiology in Freely Moving Mice. Neuron 100 (2018).
20. Wallace, D. J. et al. Rats maintain an overhead binocular field at the expense of constant fusion. Nature 498 (2013).
21. Yates, J. L. et al. Detailed characterization of neural selectivity in free viewing primates. Nat. Comm. 14,(2023).
22. Calderone, J. B., Jacobs, G. H. Spectral properties and retinal distribution of ferret cones. Vis. Neurosci. 20 (2003).
23. Michaiel, A. M., Abe, E. T., Niell, C. M. Dynamics of gaze control during prey capture in freely moving mice. eLife 9 (2020).
24. Hooks, B. M., Chen, C. Critical Periods in the Visual System: Changing Views for a Model of Experience-Dependent Plasticity. Neuron 56 (2007).
25. Hooks, B. M., Chen, C. Circuitry Underlying Experience-Dependent Plasticity in the Mouse Visual System. Neuron 106 (2020).
26. Bonnen, K., Burge, J., Yates, J., Pillow, J., Cormack, L. K. Continuous psychophysics: Target-tracking to measure visual sensitivity. J Vis. 15 (2015).
27. Sur, M., Leamey, C. A. Development and plasticity of cortical areas and networks. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2 (2001).
28. Norton, T. T. Receptive-field properties of superior colliculus cells and development of visual behavior in kittens. J. Neurophysiol. 37 (1974).
29. Scholl, B., Thomas, C. I., Ryan, M. A., Kamasawa, N., Fitzpatrick, D. Cortical response selectivity derives from strength in numbers of synapses. Nature 590
(2021).
30. Ozbay, B. N. et al. Three dimensional two-photon brain imaging in freely moving mice using a miniature fiber coupled microscope with active axial-scanning.
Sci. Rep. 8 (2018).
31. Zhao, Z. et al. Ultraflexible electrode arrays for months-long high-density electrophysiological mapping of thousands of neurons in rodents. Nat. Biomed. Eng.
(2022).
32. Chang, J. T., Whitney, D., Fitzpatrick, D. Experience-Dependent Reorganization Drives Development of a Binocularly Unified Cortical Representation of
Orientation. Neuron 107 (2020).
33. Lecoq, J. et al. Removing independent noise in systems neuroscience data using DeepInterpolation. Nat. Methods 18 (2021).
34. Ryan, M. B., Churchland, A. K., Gong, Y., Baker, C. Fastest-ever calcium sensors broaden the potential of neuronal imaging. Nature 615 (2023).

